WEEK 1 — Requirements, Tool Setup & Architecture Freeze
Goals
Finalize SoC architecture
Set up toolchain
Lock project scope (very important)
Tasks
Decide CPU core: PicoRV32 (recommended)
Freeze memory sizes (16 KB instr + 16 KB data)
Freeze address map
Decide clock target: 50 MHz
Install tools:
Yosys
OpenROAD
OpenLane (if using)
Icarus / Verilator
Create Git repository
Deliverables
Architecture block diagram
Memory map table
Tool versions documented
Project folder structure
📌 Professor value: Shows planning & constraint awareness

WEEK 2 — CPU Core Integration (RTL)
Goals
Get CPU core running standalone
Tasks
Integrate PicoRV32
Connect clock & reset
Minimal testbench:
Clock generation
Reset sequencing
Run a simple instruction (NOP loop)
Deliverables
cpu_top.v
Passing RTL simulation
Screenshot of waveform
📌 Professor value: CPU bring-up experience

WEEK 3 — Instruction Memory Design
Goals
Instruction fetch path works correctly
Tasks
Implement 16 KB instruction memory
Synchronous read
Address alignment (word addressing)
Connect CPU instruction bus
Load program using $readmemh
Tests
CPU fetches instructions correctly
PC increments as expected
Deliverables
instr_mem.v
Test program (assembly + hex)
📌 Professor value: Harvard architecture justification

WEEK 4 — Data Memory Design
Goals
Data read/write path works
Tasks
Implement 16 KB data memory
Handle byte/word accesses
Connect CPU data bus
Add write-enable logic
Tests
Load/store instructions
Memory R/W test program
Deliverables
data_mem.v
Memory testbenc
📌 Professor value: Memory system understanding

WEEK 5 — Interconnect & Address Decoder
Goals
Full SoC address map working
Tasks
Implement address decode logic
Route accesses to:
Instruction memory
Data memory
UART
Timer
Implement read data mux
Default error response for invalid addresses
Deliverables
interconnect.v
Address decode logic diagram
📌 Professor value: Bus architecture & decode logic

WEEK 6 — UART Design & Integration
Goals
Serial output from SoC
Tasks
Implement UART TX + RX
Baud rate divider
Memory-mapped registers:
DATA
STATUS
BAUD
Connect to interconnect
Tests
Program prints "Hello"
Verify baud timing in simulation
Deliverables
uart.v
UART test waveform
Terminal output screenshot
📌 Professor value: Peripheral design + MMIO

WEEK 7 — Timer & Interrupt (Optional but Strong)
Goals
Timer functionality (+ optional IRQ)
Tasks
Implement 32-bit counter
Compare register
Control register
Optional interrupt output to CPU
Tests
Timer increments
Compare match event
Optional interrupt handler
Deliverables
timer.v
Timer testbench
📌 Professor value: SoC extensibility & control logic

WEEK 8 — Full SoC Integration & Verification
Goals
Entire SoC runs correctly
Tasks
Integrate all blocks into mini_soc_top
Run full program:
Memory test
UART print
Timer test
Clean up RTL warnings
Deliverables
mini_soc_top.v
Full SoC testbench
Simulation logs
📌 Professor value: System-level verification

WEEK 9 — Synthesis (Yosys)
Goals
RTL → gate-level netlist
Tasks
Write synthesis script
Run Yosys
Check:
Cell count
Area
Estimated timing
Fix latch/inference issues
Deliverables
Synthesized netlist
Synthesis report
Area & gate count table
📌 Professor value: RTL-to-gate understanding

WEEK 10 — Floorplanning, Placement & CTS (OpenROAD)
Goals
Physical implementation starts
Tasks
Define die & core area
Set utilization (~55%)
Place IO pins
Run placement
Run CTS
Analyze:
Clock skew
Insertion delay
Deliverables
Floorplan screenshot
CTS report
Clock tree visualization
📌 Professor value: Physical design fundamentals

WEEK 11 — Routing, Timing Closure & GDS
Goals
Timing-clean final layout
Tasks
Global + detailed routing
Fix setup/hold violations
Check DRC
Generate final GDS
Extract timing (post-route)
Target Metrics
Frequency: 50 MHz
WNS ≥ 0
TNS = 0
No DRC errors
Deliverables
Final GDS
Post-route timing report
Layout screenshots
📌 Professor value: End-to-end ASIC flow

WEEK 12 — Report, Slides & Viva Preparation
Goals
Clearly explain everything you did
Tasks
Write report sections:
Architecture
RTL design
Verification
Physical design
Timing analysis
Prepare presentation slides
Prepare answers for:
Critical paths
Clocking decisions
Memory design
Area/frequency tradeoffs
Deliverables
Final report (PDF)
Presentation slides
Backup screenshots/logs
📌 Professor value: Depth of understanding

Option 3: Direnv (The Professional Choice)
Many developers use a tool called direnv. It detects when you cd into a specific folder and automatically loads the environment variables for only that project.
    Install it: sudo apt install direnv.
    Create a file named .envrc in your riscv-mini-soc/ folder.
    Put your exports inside it.
    Now, every time you open a terminal and enter your project folder, the paths are loaded. When you leave the folder, they are cleared.
Important: Why Automation can be "Dangerous"
In VLSI design, tool versions matter immensely. If you start a second project next semester that uses a different version of OpenROAD or a different PDK (Process Design Kit), having everything "fully automated" in your .bashrc can cause conflicts where the old paths interfere with the new project.
Recommendation for your Term Project
I suggest Option 2. By putting the paths inside your pd/config.mk or a local.mk, your project becomes a self-contained unit. When your professor asks how you managed the toolchain, you can show them that the project "knows" where its dependencies are.

Implementation Note for Peripherals

For your uart.v and timer.v, if you want them to be "instant" for now, just set their ready output to 1'b1.

Later, if you want to be "impressive," you can make the uart_ready go low when the TX buffer is full, effectively making the CPU "wait" automatically instead of you having to write a "wait loop" in C code.

Physical Design Proof: Even if the software doesn't trigger it, the OpenROAD toolchain will still have to route that timer_irq wire from the Timer (peripheral area) to the CPU (core area). You can point to this specific wire in your final GDS layout and say:

    "Here is the dedicated interrupt net. It is fully timed and routed, proving the SoC supports asynchronous event handling."

The "Bonus" Demo: If you finish early, you can write the ISR code. If you run out of time, you still have a "Feature-Complete" hardware design.

UART: 
Why a Single File is better for your project:
    OpenROAD Flow: Managing one file is much simpler for synthesis and timing reports.
    Resource Usage: You don't need a 64-byte FIFO for a "Hello World" project. A simple shift register is enough.
    Timing Closure: Keeping the logic together allows the synthesis tool to optimize the paths between the baud generator and the shift registers more easily.
   
   
    The Critical Fix: Byte vs. Word Addressing
Look at your program.hex:
    The first line is @00000000.
    The next address tag is @0000000D.
    The one after that is @00000012.

The Problem: objcopy is using byte addresses (hex D is 13, hex 12 is 18). However, your Verilog memory reg [31:0] mem [0:1023] uses word indices. When Verilog's $readmemh sees @0000000D, it will try to put that data into the 13th 32-bit word (which is byte address 52), leaving a huge gap of zeros in your memory. Your CPU will fetch these zeros, execute a "NOP" or illegal instruction, and crash.
The Solution:
You need to tell objcopy to ignore the address tags or use a byte-to-word translation. The easiest way for a student project is to strip the addresses and let Verilog load them sequentially.
'$(BUILD_DIR)/program.hex: $(BUILD_DIR)/program.elf
	$(OBJCOPY) -O verilog --verilog-data-width 4 $< $@
        sed -i '/@/d' $@ '
(The sed command deletes all lines starting with @, ensuring the data is loaded continuously into your memory array).

This is the most robust way to handle address decoding in a VLSI project. By using range-based checks (Base to Base + Offset), you avoid the "aliasing" problems that happen with bit-slicing.
In a VLSI implementation, this "Comparator" style logic is very clean for the synthesis tool to map into standard cells, and it's easy to explain to your professor.

About that xxxxxxxx at 00010ffc
You saw TIME: 630000 | ADDR: 00010ffc | DATA: xxxxxxxx. This is your Stack Pointer initialization. The CPU tried to read from the very top of your Data Memory (0x10000 + 0x0FFF), but since that memory was never initialized with $readmemh, it returned X.* This is normal for a cold boot, as long as the CPU writes to the stack before it tries to read from it.*

Most RISC-V C libraries (like a standard putchar implementation) expect a "Ready" or "Empty" bit, which is the inverse of busy.

The C loop likely looks like this:
C
while ((UART_STATUS & 0x1) == 0); // Wait until bit 0 is HIGH (Ready)
UART_DATA = character;
Because your hardware returns 0 when it is ready (not busy), the C code sees that 0 and thinks: "Oh, the UART is busy, I must wait forever." This is why your simulation logs show the CPU hitting address 10000000 (UART) and then looping back to the same instructions over and over.

Step,                    File Used,                            Result
Synthesis,          config.mk + yosys,         A Verilog netlist of Sky130 gates.
Floorplan,           pin_order.cfg,      The physical boundary of the chip and pin locations.
Placement,         openroad_vars.tcl,          Initial location of all gates.
CTS,                 constraints.sdc,         A balanced clock distribution tree.
Routing,            openroad_vars.tcl,       "Final metal connections (the ""wiring"")."

it looks like you’ve finally cracked it! You are now inside the Nix shell, and yosys is clearly active because it gave you the yosys> prompt.
The reason librelane yosys -version failed is that once you are in the nix-shell, the tools are usually already in your path. You don't need to call them through the librelane wrapper; you can call them directly.

Option B: The "VLSI Standard" (Recommended) Wrap the $readmemh in a SYNTHESIS guard. This keeps your simulation working but tells Yosys to ignore the file loading (leaving the memory to be initialized by the bootloader or external pins later).

To answer your question directly: No, changing the Root Makefile in the way I suggested will not "fuck up" the project—it will actually save it.

Here is why your previous Root Makefile was the "domino" that was about to fall:
1. The "Official Flow" vs. "Your Design"

Your original Root Makefile was trying to force your design into the OpenROAD-flow-scripts system directory. That flow is designed for massive chips and often overwrites your custom timing constraints and memory behaviors with its own defaults.

    The Risk: If you use the official flow without being an expert in it, it might optimize away your UART or ignore your 1KB memory limits because it thinks it knows better.

    The Solution: By pointing the Makefile to your local pd/ folder, you keep total control. You know exactly which synth.tcl is being used. This is how "Tapeout-ready" designs are actually managed—everything stays local to the project.
    
FLOORPLAN:
    The Grid Alignment Message
    [WARNING IFP-0028] Core area lower left (10.000, 10.000) snapped to (10.120, 10.880).
What it means: In the Sky130 process, every gate must sit on a specific X/Y grid (the "site"). You asked for the core to start at (10, 10), but that specific spot doesn't align with the legal grid for the unithd site.
    Is it a problem? No. OpenROAD automatically "snapped" it to the nearest legal starting point. This is normal and actually prevents manufacturing errors.

OPENROAD DOCUMENTAION MY GOAT MY SAVIOUR WOW I SHOULD HAVE USED IT EARLIER, BEST STUFF OUT THERE


The PDN (Power Distribution Network)
Now that the macros are in their "homes," we need to give them power. If we don't build a strong power grid, the PicoRV32 will suffer from voltage drops, and the chip will fail.
Since you are using Sky130, your PDN needs to connect to two different types of pins:
    Standard Cells (CPU/UART): Use VPWR and VGND.
    SRAM Macros: Use vccd1 and vssd1.
    
add_global_connection: This is the "Electronic Student's" best friend. It tells the tool that every pin named VPWR (in the cells) and vccd1 (in the SRAM) belongs to the same electrical net: VDD.

met1 vs met4: met1 is thin and runs horizontally to touch every gate. met4 is thick and runs vertically to bring in high current from the outside.

Seeing [INFO ODB-0131] Created 9870 components is the ultimate green flag. It confirms your PicoRV32 SoC is fully present in the physical database and hasn't been optimized away. Now that the Inserting grid: stdcell_grid message has appeared, your chip is finally getting its "nervous system" for power.
. Verification of the PDN
After the Inserting grid message, you should see a report of vias and rectangles. For a Tapeout-Ready design, you need to ensure the PDN successfully "strapped" your macros.

Why 40%? In an 800×800 or 900×900 die, 40% is the "Goldilocks zone."
    It's dense enough to keep wires short (better timing).
    It's sparse enough that the Router won't get stuck later. If you were at 80% density, you’d likely have "Routing Congestion" where there aren't enough metal tracks to connect all the gates.

Warning: Found unsupported expression 'D&!SCE|SCD&SCE' in pin attribute of cell 'sky130_fd_sc_hd__sdfxtp_2' - skipping.
Warning: Found unsupported expression 'D&!SCE|SCD&SCE' in pin attribute of cell 'sky130_fd_sc_hd__sdfxtp_4' - skipping.
Warning: Found unsupported expression 'D&DE&!SCE|IQ&!DE&!SCE|SCD&SCE' in pin attribute of cell 'sky130_fd_sc_hd__sedfxbp_1' - skipping.
Warning: Found unsupported expression 'D&DE&!SCE|IQ&!DE&!SCE|SCD&SCE' in pin attribute of cell 'sky130_fd_sc_hd__sedfxbp_2' - skipping.

The expressions like D&!SCE|SCD&SCE are Boolean descriptions of the logic inside a Scan D-Flip-Flop (SDF).
    D: Data input.
    SCD: Scan Chain Data input.
    SCE: Scan Chain Enable.
The logic (D AND NOT SCE) OR (SCD AND SCE) is just a simple 2-to-1 Multiplexer that chooses between your normal data and the test data
Yosys (the synthesis tool) reads the .lib files to understand how to map your Verilog to gates.
    Complexity: Some Sky130 cells have very complex Boolean equations for their pins.
    Parser Limitations: The built-in Liberty parser in older versions of Yosys sometimes struggles with specific syntax styles for these multiplexed flip-flops.
    The Result: Yosys says, "I don't understand this specific cell's internal logic, so I won't use it for mapping."
    
Does this affect my MiniSoC?
Short answer: No.
    Mapping: Yosys will simply use the standard D-Flip-Flops (sky130_fd_sc_hd__dfxtp_1) instead of the Scan-enabled versions. Since you aren't implementing a DFT (Design For Test) scan chain for this university project, you don't actually need these specific cells.
    
1. The HPWL Explosion (146% Delta)
You might be worried seeing delta HPWL 146%. In a smaller design, this would be a red flag, but here’s why it happened:
    Placement Padding: By adding set_placement_padding, you forced the cells to stay further apart.
    Legalization: global_placement allowed cells to overlap to get the shortest possible wires. detailed_placement (or legalization) pushed them onto legal sites and away from your SRAM macros.
    The Trade-off: Your wires got longer (HPWL increased), but your chip is now routable. Without this "delta," you would have shorts and DRC errors during the routing stage.
    
2. The Filler Success
    [INFO DPL-0001] Placed 37321 filler instances.
This is the most important line for your "Tapeout." You had ~9,800 logic cells, but you added 37,321 fillers.
    Why so many? Because you have a 900x900 die (plenty of room) and only 26% utilization.
    The Result: Your VDD and VSS power rails are now continuous across the entire 900um width of the chip. Your PicoRV32 now has a solid electrical connection.

3. Mirroring Optimization
    [INFO DPL-0020] Mirrored 2469 instances
    [INFO DPL-0023] HPWL delta -1.2 %
This was a "free win." By simply flipping 2,469 cells horizontally, OpenROAD reduced the total wire length by 1.2% before legalization. In a real chip, this reduces power consumption and slightly improves speed.

Decoding the "Critical Path"
The second report shows your Worst Case Timing Path. This is the longest "marathon" a signal has to run between two flip-flops.
    Logic Depth: Notice the long list of nand, nor, and lpflow cells. This signal is passing through roughly 30 gates in a single clock cycle.
    Arrival Time (17.24ns): The signal starts at one flip-flop and reaches the next in ~17.25ns.
    Required Time (19.34ns): Because your clock is 20ns (minus some safety "uncertainty"), the signal had to arrive by 19.34ns.
    Positive Slack (+2.09ns): You actually have a 2ns "cushion." This means your chip could probably be pushed to ~55MHz without failing.
    
NDR (Non-Default Rules) are actually the tool trying to help you.	

OpenROAD usually tries to route clock nets with "double width and double spacing" (NDR) to protect the clock from noise and reduce resistance. However, because your design is getting tight in certain areas, the tool is saying:
    "I can't fit these thick clock wires through the narrow gaps anymore. I'm going to use regular thin wires instead to avoid causing a traffic jam (congestion)."
This is a common trade-off. It’s better to have a thin-wire clock that routes successfully than a thick-wire clock that results in an unmanufacturable chip.

Fixing the Ground Net Error (DRT-0305)
The synthesis tool tied some unused inputs to a "zero" net, but labeled it as GROUND. In OpenROAD, the detailed router only wants to touch SIGNAL nets.

Solving the Congestion (GRT-0116)
Your design is "congested," meaning there are too many wires trying to pass through the same narrow corridors (likely around your SRAM macro or the CPU's dense logic). Even though it's moving to detailed routing, a congested global route usually leads to thousands of DRC violations that never resolve.
